Sprint 02. Applications for mobile devices
Course: 105025-2526
Institution: University of Lleida (Campus Igualada)
Professor: Vítor da Silva Verbel
SPRINT-02. Travel Planner Logic
Delivery: 22/03/2026 23.55
Abstract
In this sprint, students will focus on implementing the main logic of the Travel Planner
application. This includes managing trip itineraries, handling CRUD operations for
travel items, and ensuring interactions between different parts of the system. The goal is
to build functional features that allow users to plan and modify their trips.
Additionally, students should test their implementation and document their progress
while integrating improvements and feedback from Sprint I.
Objectives
1. Implement trip management logic – CRUD operations for trips and itinerary
items.
2. Develop the travel itinerary/activities flow – Define how users can add,
update, and delete travel activities.
3. Ensure user interactions are functional – Basic UI interactions without focusing
on design.
4. Validate input and enforce constraints – Prevent incorrect or incomplete travel
plans.
5. Document and test the logic – Ensure correctness before moving to the next
sprint.
Tasks
T1. Implement Travel Management Logic (4 Points)
• T1.1 Implement inMemory CRUD operations for trips (addTrip, editTrip,
deleteTrip) following MVVM pattern.
Each trip must contain at least the following fields:
• title (String)
• startDate (String) format: dd/MM/YYYY
• endDate (String) format: dd/MM/YYYY
• description (String)
Sprint 02. Applications for mobile devices
Course: 105025-2526
Institution: University of Lleida (Campus Igualada)
Professor: Vítor da Silva Verbel
• T1.2 Implement inMemory CRUD operations for itinerary/activity items
(addActivity, updateActivity, deleteActivity) following MVVM pattern.
Each itinerary activity must contain:
• title (String)
• description (string)
• date (LocalDate)
• time (LocalTime)
• T1.3 Ensure proper data validation (e.g., dates must be in the future, required
fields, use datepickers in all date fields).
o Dates must be selected using DatePicker components.
o It must not be possible to insert free text in date fields.
o Trip start date must be before trip end date.
o Activities must be within the trip date range.
Sprint 02. Applications for mobile devices
Course: 105025-2526
Institution: University of Lleida (Campus Igualada)
Professor: Vítor da Silva Verbel
• T1.4 Implement user settings.
o User settings must be persisted using Android SharedPreferences.
o The application must load the saved preferences when the application
starts again.
o At minimum, the following settings must be implemented and stored:
▪ username
▪ date of birth (text)
▪ dark mode (boolean)
▪ application language
• T1.5 Implement multi-language. (minimum 3 languages [en,ca,es])
T2. Design and Implement Itinerary Flow (3 Points)
• T2.1 Structure how users will interact with the itinerary.
o Menu -> Travel -> Itinerary (CRUD)
• UI → ViewModel → Repository → Data Source
• T2.2 Implement a basic UI flow for adding and modifying trip details and
itinerary.
o Menu -> Travel -> Itinerary
• T2.3 Ensure updates reflect dynamically in the main trip list and itinerary list.
T3. Implement Data Validation and Testing (3 Points)
• T3.1 Implement basic input validation (e.g., empty fields, incorrect dates).
o Input validation must be implemented in the ViewModel layer and UI
layer, before sending data to the repository.
o The UI must show clear error messages when:
▪ required fields are empty
▪ dates are incorrect
▪ activity date is outside the trip range.
• T3.2 Write unit tests for trip and itinerary CRUD operations.
• T3.3 Simulate user interactions and log errors or unexpected behaviors.
• T3.4 Update documentation with test results and fixes applied.
• T3.5 Add logs (to be seen in logcat) and commentaries applying good practices
Delivery
• Students must submit the GitHub link containing a repository with all tasks
completed and the respective release/tag. The sprints .md documents must list
task assignments for each team member, ensuring everyone contributes.
• Ensure this release is the v2.X.X. Remember, only the latest version will be
tested.
Sprint 02. Applications for mobile devices
Course: 105025-2526
Institution: University of Lleida (Campus Igualada)
Professor: Vítor da Silva Verbel
• Record a video demonstrating your application running showing all
implemented tasks using the Android Studio emulator recording feature or your
mobile phone recording feature if you are using it to test. Save the video in the
following directory: /doc/evidence/v2.X.X. Remember, only the latest version
will be tested.
Folder Structure
UI (Screens) > ViewModel > TripRepository (interface) > TripRepositoryImpl >
FakeTripDataSource (InMemory)
Sprint 02. Applications for mobile devices
Course: 105025-2526
Institution: University of Lleida (Campus Igualada)
Professor: Vítor da Silva Verbel
Definition of InMemory
In this sprint, the application will store data only in memory, meaning that the
information is kept temporarily while the application is running.
An InMemory data source is a simple data storage mechanism that keeps the data
inside the application's runtime (usually using lists or collections). The data is not
persisted to disk or database, and therefore it will be lost when the application is
restarted.
The purpose of using an InMemory implementation in this sprint is to allow students to
focus on:
• application architecture
• business logic implementation
• interaction between ViewModel and Repository
• CRUD operations
without the additional complexity of database persistence.
Students may implement the InMemory storage using:
• a mutable list
• a singleton object
• a repository containing an internal collection
Fake Dataset
To simplify testing and development, the application may initialize the InMemory
storage using a fake dataset.
A fake dataset is a small set of predefined objects used only for testing the behavior of
the application. Example:
• Preloaded trips
• Example activities
• Sample user data
This allows the application to display meaningful content even before users create their
own data.
Sprint 02. Applications for mobile devices
Course: 105025-2526
Institution: University of Lleida (Campus Igualada)
Professor: Vítor da Silva Verbel
Example: InMemory Trip Storage
Below is a simple example of an InMemory datasource used to store trips during
runtime.
object FakeTripDataSource {
 private val trips = mutableListOf<Trip>()
 fun getTrips(): List<Trip> {
 return trips
 }
 //PENDING IMPLEMENTATION
 }
}
In this example:
• The repository keeps all trips inside a mutable list.
• The data exists only while the application is running.
• CRUD operations are implemented using simple list operations.
This approach is sufficient for the current sprint and will be replaced by persistent
storage mechanisms in later sprints.
Frequent Implementation Issues
During the evaluation of previous editions of this sprint, several recurrent
implementation problems were identified. Students are encouraged to review the
following points carefully to avoid common mistakes that may negatively affect the
evaluation.
1. Loss of ViewModel State
The application must correctly preserve the state of the interface when configuration
changes occur.
Common problems include:
• Losing data when the device screen is rotated.
Sprint 02. Applications for mobile devices
Course: 105025-2526
Institution: University of Lleida (Campus Igualada)
Professor: Vítor da Silva Verbel
• Losing data when navigating between screens.
• Losing data after pressing the back button.
The ViewModel must be responsible for maintaining the state of the UI and preventing
unnecessary data loss.
2. Incorrect or Missing Date Validation
Trips and activities must follow consistent date constraints.
The following validations are required:
• The start date of a trip must be earlier than the end date.
• Activities must be scheduled within the date range of the corresponding trip.
• Invalid dates must not be accepted by the system.
Whenever a validation rule is violated, the application must display a clear error
message to the user.
3. Lack of User Feedback for Validation Errors
A frequent problem is that validation errors occur internally but are not communicated
to the user.
Incorrect implementations include:
• Operations that fail silently.
• Closing a form or screen without explaining the reason.
• Allowing invalid input without showing feedback.
The interface must always provide clear feedback indicating which field contains an
error and why.
4. Incorrect Persistence of User Settings
User preferences must be stored persistently using SharedPreferences.
Typical mistakes include:
• Storing values only in memory.
• Not reloading the saved preferences when the application restarts.
• Losing settings after closing the application.
The application must load the stored settings automatically when it starts.
Sprint 02. Applications for mobile devices
Course: 105025-2526
Institution: University of Lleida (Campus Igualada)
Professor: Vítor da Silva Verbel
5. Incorrect Use of the Application Architecture
The architecture presented in class must be respected.
The expected interaction flow is:
UI → ViewModel → Repository → Data Source
Common mistakes include:
• Implementing business logic directly in the UI layer.
• Accessing data sources directly from the UI.
• Duplicating domain models inside the ViewModel.
Maintaining a clear separation of responsibilities improves maintainability and
testability.
6. Missing or Insufficient Logging
Applications should include logging messages visible in Logcat to facilitate debugging
and monitoring.
Logs should be included for:
• CRUD operations (create, update, delete).
• Validation errors.
• Unexpected behaviors.
It is recommended to use appropriate log levels such as:
• DEBUG for internal state information
• INFO for successful operations
• ERROR for failures or unexpected situations
7. Confusing Navigation Flow
The navigation structure of the application should be simple and predictable.
The recommended navigation flow is:
Menu → Travel List → Trip Detail → Itinerary
Users should always understand:
• where they are in the application
• which actions are available
Sprint 02. Applications for mobile devices
Course: 105025-2526
Institution: University of Lleida (Campus Igualada)
Professor: Vítor da Silva Verbel
• how to return to the previous screen
A clear navigation structure significantly improves usability.
Evaluation Criteria
Metric
Unsatisfactory
(factor: 0.4)
Acceptable (0.6) Very Good (1) Excellent (1.1)
Clarity
Code lacks
documentation
and is unreadable.
Some
documentation,
but style is poor.
Welldocumented,
but minor
readability
issues.
Fully
documented,
wellstructured, and
easy to read.
Modularity
Poorly structured
functions with
little logic.
Divided into
appropriate units
but lacks
cohesion.
Mostly wellstructured
with minimal
redundancy.
Highly
modular,
reusable, and
efficient code.
Completeness
Major functionality
missing or poorly
handled.
Some case
handling but lacks
robustness.
Mostly
complete,
minor cases
may be
missing.
Fully functional
with all cases
handled
properly.
Testing
No tests or
minimal test
coverage.
Tests covering
partially a major
functionality.
Tests covering
all major
functionalities.
Tests covering
all major and
minor
functionalities.